For anyone who has been through the process
of the passing of a loved one, you know that
there are moments that are painful and trying to one's soul.
This is especially true when it's a person's spouse
and age has taken its toll through dementia
and a slow or even rapid decline of health.
Fern Stewart Welsh has walked this walk and is sharing
her experience in her book, The Heart Knows the Way.
This beautiful and charming woman had to dig
down into the deepest part of her being
to connect to the sublime part that knows all
to learn about what her beloved husband was experiencing
as his mind and body slipped away.
What she learned will benefit each and every one
of us that faces a loved one's decline.
(soothing music playing)
This is such a sweet and confirming
and important work that you've done.
And just to lay a little bit of foundation here,
certainly someone noted very well in this field,
Elizabeth Kubler-Ross, and you were very close friends.
And she actually helped you through the death and dying
and experience of your sweetie pie, Ken.
Yes.
And so, and you are, now at this time,
carrying a lot of this work forward.
And really, this book is sort of your flagship effort
in helping people understand the process
we all are going to go through at one time or another,
short or long, in the process of death and dying.
Can you give a little bit of background
about your relationship with Ken
and where the beginning
of the end actually began?
Well, it makes me smile because one
of the greatest things that I've experienced
as a result of going through what I did
is that whenever I think of my late husband,
I don't think of it in a sad way.
It makes me smile within, all right.
And I guess the experience started
about 15 years before his death in 2002.
He started having certain illnesses,
and it was quite awhile before I realized
that he was not going to be able to come back
from those illnesses, but was indeed in that process
of the decline that would end in death.
And I guess that was probably within five, six, seven
years after he began having illnesses at different times.
So this was a long, kind of,
in one sense, third-dimensionally downhill slide
on a physical level, and you might even say,
emotional or mental on some levels
from what you understood in the beginning.
But you began, as it was becoming more challenging
as his health was slipping away,
you began really looking inside for answers
and that seems like that's kind of
where this really journey begins.
Can you talk about that?
Yes, it's called sheer desperation, absolute desperation.
I wanted to approach this with my husband,
who I loved dearly.
I wanted to approach this in a way that was more helpful,
more enlightening, and more loving, and I tried.
For about four or five years, I was totally unsuccessful
and what I was doing was using just my sheer energy
and force of will, and I was becoming exhausted.
I didn't recuperate from even a light cold
or something like that very easily.
So I did what I guess what millions of people do
when they come to a point like this.
I went within, and I was determined
that I would either have that connection with the
eternal and sublime something that's within everyone,
or I would know the reason why not.
And so I devoted my life to that.
How did you go about doing this?
How did that process work for you?
Well, I had been a journaler all my life,
well most of my life, anyway about 40 years, daily.
That had continued during this time with my husband,
and I used that, I would write out
all my cares and my concerns and pray.
And then I did what I have done most of my life.
When nothing happened, no burning bush,
no immediate, whatever,
I went out and tried to do it myself.
And this time, I was determined
that that wasn't going to be the case,
and so day by day, I went within, I prayed,
and the process was such that the more
that I went within, the more content I became
at being in meditation and in prayer
and being within myself because prior to this,
I had been working, I retired.
And when I did retire, I had time.
and didn't have to look at the clock
and be concerned about how much time I spent.
So sometimes, I would spend an hour or two.
I would say prayers for me, for my family,
for the world, for the Earth, and I would cry,
and I would do all sorts of beseeching type things,
and just continued day after day after day.
The more desperate the situation got,
when I could see that Ken was losing awareness of his life.
And everything around him, then I really spent
the time there, and my daughter suggested a book to me
called Secrets of the Vine and I read it.
And what I discovered was that
it's certainly a different process than what I was doing.
Instead of crying and begging and pleading, it indicated
that I was to spend that time as I would
with a very dear friend, getting to know that dear friend,
you know, sharing all of my concerns, my desires
with my loves, my everything.
And literally, that's what I focused on.
And then one day, I wrote out, you know,
I want a personal relationship with you God.
I don't know how to do it.
How does a little person like myself
have a personal relationship with the God
of the universe, the allness of the universe?
And innocently, within my brain
and I think my heart too, came that message.
Fern, Fern, Fern, I'm going to cry.
You have always had it.
Right, it's always been there.
It's always been there.
Now while this was happening,
Ken was going through some pretty dramatic stuff.
He had, at one point, finally had to go
into a facility where he had assisted living
because his problems were becoming
too challenging for you to deal with.
Right.
In addition, there were a lot
of emotional challenges, and some of them
were almost comical in reading your book.
It's not funny when you're that person.
No.
To see your husband, you know,
asking you to make wedding arrangements
with the 21 year-old nurse (laughs).
Right.
Because he knows you know him well.
And these moments that one would say are not
particularly lucid, but that are there all the time.
And so, what was happening on an emotional level
in you as you were dealing with these bizarre sorts
of encounters with your husband on a regular basis?
First of all, it was devastating
because I could not believe that this man who adored me
and who I adored would be going
through this kind of experience.
That sent me running back to communion with God
with that eternal and sublime something
that's within you, me, and everyone.
And that's when I was told, if he finds solace
in any relationship or imagined relationship,
because every soul likes that companionship,
that feeling of human companionship,
you must allow it and it will not harm you
in any way, shape, or form.
So initially, the ego might hear this.
What happens there?
The ego was devastated.
I could not believe that this was going on,
that he could forget me, and could forget
our relationship, and I did have a real problem with that.
It took me quite awhile to be able to deal with that.
And that went on off-and-on for almost a year.
Right, and so, ultimately,
you started getting this clear connection.
with the force (laughs),
the grand force within that permeates all.
Right.
And you started getting very clear messages.
Yes.
So how did these messages start out?
They were more simple in the beginning,
but they really became quite detailed and refined
in the knowledge that was passed through to you.
So how did they begin?
Where did your relationship then
with the sublime force begin and take you from there
with all this other stuff in the backdrop, you know,
just hurting you on an ego and feelings level everyday?
Well, I think gradually, I was becoming
more fine-tuned to this relationship.
I will be honest with you.
From the very first, I trusted it implicitly.
It felt so right, it felt wonderful.
As I said in the book, it felt like
it was my natural state of being.
So even though I thought other people
might question it, I didn't.
Right.
Because it was totally, totally right and totally good.
I think that being fine-tuned meant that,
number one, I was more relaxed when I was in that.
I wasn't so desperate, and I hope
I'm answering your question.
I was not so desperate so I could ask
more detailed questions.
I could accept the answers
and accept the guidance.
I did absolutely everything that I was asked to do,
and at some point within me, I was able
to come to peace with these things that
otherwise, I don't know what I would have done.
I'd like to talk to you about some
of those things because I think most everybody out here
is going to go through, hold someone's hand
through this kind of process and certainly if not,
they're certainly going to go through it
on some level themselves.
I mean, if you're young and you die quickly
in a car accident, it's a very much quicker transition
than what Ken had.
Right.
Ken's was a very lengthy transition.
What kind of guidance did you get, for example,
when you were given the guidance
regarding his behavior beyond needing
the solace and companionship
because there were times when he was quite lucid.
Yes.
And there were other times
when he wasn't there at all.
Can you give us some real specifics
about what you were told, about what a person's
going through in these kinds of,
under these conditions with this kind of behavior?
I'll try and if this isn't exactly
what you're asking, let me know.
One of the things that helped me a lot was understanding,
at a certain point, through these messages,
what my Ken was going through, which was
that when he was lucid, he was in this dimension.
When he was not lucid, he was in the next dimension,
which we called death, okay?
And so he was gong back and forth
between those two dimensions.
And one of my primary desires, it was a heart desire,
was to maintain our bond of love,
our connection of love of no matter what it looked like
on the surface, externally to me or to other people,
and that, I believe, I was able to do.
And I was able to do that only
with the guidance that I had and with being told,
you know, to watch his eyes, for instance,
because then I could tell when he was,
even though he may not react to me as he would normally,
he did seem to know my energy, at least.
So I could tell when he was there and when he was here,
when he was lucid in front of me.
And he became very facile near the end
of his life with being able to go back and forth.
And it was really fascinating because he had been
the type of man who was very fun-loving (laughs),
and he teased a lot, and so instead of saying,
"Oh, you look wonderful today," he would say,
"For a fat girl, you clean up pretty good."
You know, things like that.
So one day I'm with him and in this interchange,
he comes back and I can tell that he's there
with me totally, and he says, "When I feel the love
"coming from you, it makes me want to return it."
And that was absolutely incredible
because he had not been that kind of man
who would express his emotions in that way.
So I think that as I was being fine-tuned,
is about the best way I can express it.
As I was being fine-tuned in this energy,
I was able to bring more of it out
to my associations and interactions with Ken.
I became able to accept what was going on,
and try to stay out of the way with my ego
and stay out of the way with what my desires were
and just help this soul make his journey
in his soul's time and make his transition.
What also was interesting was that,
because he was going between dimensions
and going to the other side, he was able
to dip into sources of love and understanding
in such that, he may not have had access to
within himself in his third dimesional life.
Right.
Is it a two-way street then,
bringing the love both ways?
You committed to giving it, and he was
already experiencing some over there.
How did this work between you then,
on a soul-level from what your guidance was telling you
about the flowing of love back-and-forth
from his comings and goings?
I can remember that as he became more facile
as he became more facile on these journeys,
and that he was mirroring me, my love.
We mirroed each other.
That's about the best way I can answer that.
And I don't know, I had no indication
that he had, from verbally, that he had a new understanding.
What he brought back was love
and it was indicative in that one thing that he said
and a couple of others, and I don't remember
the others right now.
But mainly, from the way,
he became soft, he became,
he had been a very powerful businessman,
and a very in-control businessman,
and yet he became very soft.
I mean he was always tender and loving
to me and to family, but he also had a very strong side
in order to operate in the corporate world.
So he became very soft and very tender,
and very child-like.
And those are the major things that I noticed.
Back to his more essential nature.
Right.
So when the time started drawing near
toward the very last couple of days of his life,
what kind of information was flowing
through, at that time, for you?
Persevere, persevere, persevere.
You will be victorious, everything that you have experienced
in your life has brought you to this point.
Can you expand on that a little bit
to this point, why this point for each one
of us to deal with this situation?
Maybe I'm thinking about, now that you ask a question,
I'm thinking about the fact that when this all started,
I thought, "Will I be enough?
"Will I be able to do this in a way
"that my heart and soul desires?
"Will I be able to do it in a helpful,
"life-affirming, spiritually-affirming way?"
And I guess that was my concern all the way through.
And I think what was meant by that guidance was
that, at this point, I was ready to take it all the way
and should have no fear about that.
And there really are just some
beautiful pearls of wisdom in there for each
of these little, daily situations that were painful
that you encountered to help you through there.
I mean, I highly recommend anybody
that's going into this kind of stage with somebody.
It's a wonderful, gentle kind of guidebook for them
to help them understand from the other perspective
and not just their own fears, and as you say, pains,
and you know, little whiplashes of the ego and so forth.
I think one of the things I would like to stress is
that it's possible, number one,
for a person, an ordinary person
to accompany a loved one in a way that is life-affirming
and is helpful and is loving, and I think
that's very important, and I can say that because I did it.
And I know that if I did it, anybody else can.
And what effect did it have
after Ken made his transition and you were going
through the normal process people go through?
What was different in what you experienced
versus maybe somebody who hadn't been able
to go through it with that kind of knowledge and grace?
Immediately, I don't think there was any difference.
I did 60 days of mourning
and I gave myself to the process totally.
I lived, ate, slept, thought, you know, cried,
did all the things that any human
being would do that loves someone.
After the 60 days, Mrs. Kubler-Ross called me,
and said, "Fern, have you finished your book?"
And I said, "No," I'm crying.
And she said, "You must finish it,"
because she had read the book,
the manuscript before it was complete.
And so she encouraged me to continue it.
And that caused me to go to the computer,
and to look at the book that I had been writing
to chronicle my husband's death and dying,
and that seemed to be
a positive step in me working through it
because writing to me is a catharsis.
It's a natural healing process.
I've done that all my life, so I think
that started me on the next stage,
which is finishing that book and I have not looked back.
I found myself soon filled with joy
with boundless enthusiasm for life,
knowing that there is a way to go through that.
That is diametrically opposed to
what many people experience.
Death isn't the most horrible thing in the world.
It's meant to be a sacred, life-affirming,
spiritually-enlightening event,
and that's what I experienced,
that's what I'm going to take out to the world.
If you enjoyed this interview,
you can learn her entire story by picking up
a copy of The Heart Knows the Way.
It's a wonderful, how-to guide
in assisting someone to the other side.
Meanwhile, other interviews you might like are
Dannion Brinkley and Mitchel Gibson,
who also speak to life beyond this dimension.
Until next time, thanks for watching.
(soothing music)